Title: Editing

----

Published: 2019-01-12

----

Tags: 

----

Text: 

Editing always requires the longest time of any step in the process. There are very few photographs that I know will make the series as soon as I see them, most will stay there indecisively, shuffling around, getting cut out and brought back. Shuffling the order is important, it forces me to see new sequences and connections where before I didn't. Some new photographs make their way in the selection like this. 

If I feel I'm getting stuck, I'll leave the selection for some time, to let it sit while I work on something else. This affords me more perspective and a bit more of an objective eye. 
I'll also involve someone around this time to help me with edits. Whether they're a photographer or not is irrelevant but it's always someone who knows my photography and whose judgement I trust. Too soon and the series isn't coherent enough yet or there's too much material for anyone else to reasonably sit through.

The idea is to arrive at the most interesting set through successive iterations of selections.

Some hard decisions involve excluding strong pictures that are perhaps too strong for the set (they stand out too much and overshadow the rest). I also tend to leave some pictures in the set which I'm more emotionally attached to that might otherwise not really belong there. For some pictures, the only way to really tell whether to exclude them or not is by making a print. At various points in this stage I'll go to the darkroom with a 10-15 item list of frames to print. 
Printing really puts on paper what I had in mind when I first shot something, or reinterprets it in a new way. Either way, the print is the reference for what it will look like in the set. Printing often helps me further edit down a set.

If it seems like I'm mostly discarding photographs, it's essentially that for most of the editing stages.

## Sequencing

Arranging the set in a sequence to me is about coherence and balance. I don't shoot in a narrative way so a specific order is rarely important.
